<!-- SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 David Fong -->
<!-- SPDX-License-Identifier: CC0-1.0 -->

I expect this library and its application wrappers not to have many users. Not many people are interested in programming sudoku solvers, and can't really think of any "practical uses" of having one. The most I expect is for a subset of the small community of hobbyist/research domain-experts in the field to give it a glance and maybe try running it. If within that small community it gains significant attention, I'd be pleasantly surprised.

If anyone makes modifications to improve the project in accordance with my goals for it, I would like to have used available mechanisms to maximise my chance of being able to legally make those improvements part of my copy of the project. I would also like to protect my users' freedom to read and understand the source code of any modified copy of the program which they receive. This is why I license the project with AGPL-3.0-or-later.

Considering that I expect the potential user base to be small, and for the project to be used for hobby/research purposes, I don't have a lot of reason to write the CMake code to support installing the library on a system and using `find_package` to depend upon such an installation. After reading Alex Reinking's blog post on how to implement that support for dual shared/static libraries, I feel like the boilerplate isn't worth it. For similar reasons, I'm not too keep on supporting CPack installation, although I'm personally curious to learn about it just for learning's sake.