README.md, before:


# Sudoku Solution Generation with C++

While most existing programming work related to Sudoku tackles the problem of _solving_ puzzles, this one looks at _generating_ the solutions that are then turned into puzzles. The goal is to answer the question, "How can we generate a highly random Sudoku solution (a full and valid Sudoku grid) out of nothing, and do so within a short timeframe for largeish grid sizes (ie. not just 9x9)." The statement is not incredibly precise, but that's because there isn't a lot of other work to benchmark against.

I have made a simple, web-based visualizer of the algorithm at work in a sister repo, [**Sudoku-JS**](https://david-fong.github.io/Sudoku-JS/), which I highly encourage you to take a look at.

## How to Run It

Make sure you have g++ installed.

Note: If your terminal doesn't support ANSI escape codes for colored text, set [`USE_ANS_ESC` in `buildflag.hpp`](src/buildflag.hpp) to `false`.

```shell
cd src
./build
./main
```

<img src="images/25x25_example.png" width="44%" align="left" />

## My Past and Future Related Works

Sudoku is a favourite puzzle game of mine. When I started programming in my first year of university, I wrote a solution generator in C. Looking back, I can say the code was terrible, but I still remember the feelings of excitement and gratification that I felt. I [reworked it after learning Java](https://github.com/david-fong/Sudoku-J), then later started this repo, and next, I look to write [a hardware implementation using SystemVerilog](https://github.com/david-fong/Sudoku-SV).

Commit message:

remove sample_data/ and talke about code in readme

README.md, after:


# Sudoku Solution Generation with C++

While most existing programming work related to Sudoku tackles the problem of _solving_ puzzles, this one looks at _generating_ the solutions that are then turned into puzzles. The goal is to answer the question, "How can we generate a highly random Sudoku solution (a full and valid Sudoku grid) out of nothing, and do so within a short timeframe for largeish grid sizes (ie. not just 9x9)." The statement is not incredibly precise, but that's because there isn't a lot of other work to benchmark against.

I have made a simple, web-based visualizer of the algorithm at work in a sister repo, [**Sudoku-JS**](https://david-fong.github.io/Sudoku-JS/), which I highly encourage you to take a look at.

## How to Run It

Make sure you have g++ installed.

Note: If your terminal doesn't support ANSI escape codes for colored text, set [`USE_ANS_ESC` in `buildflag.hpp`](src/buildflag.hpp) to `false`.

```shell
cd src
./build
./main
```

<img src="images/25x25_example.png" width="44%" align="left" />

## The Code

This is not an explanation of the algorithm! If you would like that, you can see it for yourself using [the web-visualizer](https://david-fong.github.io/Sudoku-JS/).

|   | |
|:-:|-|
| Separation of Concerns | The solver-functioning is its own class, encapsulated as a field of the REPL, which is its own, separate class. The REPL also separates token matching (for sub-commands) from token consumption, so it can be cleanly interfaced with via both strings and token enums. |
| Space Efficiency | The solver class uses a grid-size template parameter to conditionally specify the byte-width of its members. You can find those type definitions in [src/solver/size.hpp](src/sudoku/solver/size.hpp). This allows for less "wasted space" in the cache. |
| Multithreading | There isn't much interesting stuff going on here, although I learned a lot about the C++ language to write the code in a way that I was satisfied with. For large grid sizes where it takes much longer to try to generate a solution, the REPL will spawn more threads, which each run the same algorithm, but just with different seeds to randomize their work. It makes use of more of the CPU's cores. That's all. you can find the related code in the ["trials" files](src/solver). |


## My Past and Future Related Works

Sudoku is a favourite puzzle game of mine. When I started programming in my first year of university, I wrote a solution generator in C. Looking back, I can say the code was terrible, but I still remember the feelings of excitement and gratification that I felt. I [reworked it after learning Java](https://github.com/david-fong/Sudoku-J), then later started this repo, and next, I look to write [a hardware implementation using SystemVerilog](https://github.com/david-fong/Sudoku-SV).
